The Joe Rogan experience.
What you said when you sat down was absolutely perfect that the timing could not
have been better. Well, tell everybody what you do, Michael.
Well, thank you. I'm a, for a lack of a better term, a medical detective,
I've spent my whole career tracking, infectious diseases down, trying to stop.
'em trying to understand where they come from so we can make sure they don't
happen and the first place, but most of all,
trying to respond to situations just like this.
Just like this. And, um, just off the bat, how serious is this?
Is this something that we need to be terrified of? Or is this overblown or how,
how do you stand on this? Well, first.
Of all,
you have to understand the timing of it in the sense that it's just beginning.
And so in terms of what hurt pain suffering death is a happened
so far is really just beginning. Um,
this is gonna unfold for months to come yet. And that's,
I think what people don't quite yet understand, um, what we saw in China, uh,
I'm convinced as our many of my colleagues is soon as they release all of these,
uh, social distancs is mandate to stay in homes.
Haven't left your home in weeks and weeks kind of thing.
When they go back to work, they're on planes, trains, subways buses,
crowded spaces, manufacturing, plants, even China is gonna come back again.
And so this really is acting like an influenza virus,
something that transmits very, very easily through the air.
We now have data to show that you're infectious before you even get sick.
And in some cases, quite highly infectious,
just breathing is all that you need to do. So from this perspective,
I can understand why people would say, well, wait a minute,
flu kills a lot more itself every year than this does.
And I re remind people this just the beginning,
probably the best guessment we have right now on what limited data we have would
say,
this is gonna be at least 10 to 15 times worse than the worst seasonal flu year.
We see.
10 To 15 times worse in terms of fatalities. Yeah.
Yeah. And, and just illness. In fact, I just, I brought some numbers. We, uh,
conservably estimate that this could in, uh,
require 48 million hospitalizations, 96 million, uh,
cases actually occurring over 480,000 deaths
that can occur over the next three to seven months with this situation.
So this is not one that to take lightly.
And I think that's what I can understand.
If you say there's only been 10 deaths or 20 deaths or 50 deaths,
just remember two weeks ago,
we were talking about almost no cases in the United States,
and now that we're testing for it and watching the spread as it's unfolding, uh,
those numbers going up astronom three weeks ago,
Italy was just living life just fine.
Now they're literally at a virtual shutdown in the Northern parts of Italy,
and that's the challenge with an infectious disease like this.
It can spread very quickly and it also can affect people.
I think maybe to put this into modern terms,
cause this is something we think of often when we think of, of, you know,
pre antibiotic days, you know, the old time medicine, um,
we have an employee at our center for infectiies research and policy at the
university of Minnesota. And she has a dear friend who lives in Milan, Italy,
and she works at a hospital there.
And she texts us to this employee of ours last night.
And this was an email that came out yesterday from one of their physicians in
Milan, at the largest hospital there. And he said,
I just got a very disturbing message from a cardiologist at one of the Milan's
largest hospitals. They're deciding who they have to let die.
They aren't screening the staff anymore because they need all hands on deck.
And they have a very small areas of the hospital, dead,
a dedicated to non COVID patients where they still screen doctors.
Everybody else is dedicated to COVID patients. So even if they're positive,
meaning that they're sick, they don't. And,
but they don't have a severe cough or fever, then they have to work. Uh,
he says that that they're seen an alarming number of cases in the 40
something, an D Dr. And as these are horrible cases.
So we need to stop thinking that this is an only an old person's disease.
This is what's, I'm gonna unfold, not just in muuhan,
it's unfolding in the line. It's unfolding here in, in Seattle.
And this is what's gonna continue to rollingly unfold throughout the world.
Yeah. Where did this rumor come from? The, that it's a, an old person's disease,
is it just because the majority of the people that have died from it so far have
been.
Older? Yes. In fact,
that's the primary risk factor for dying as being old and then having certain
underlying health problems. For example, in China, uh,
those men over the age of 70,
who also smoked were eight to 10% of them died.
65% of older Chinese men smoke the, uh,
case fatality rate.
The percentage of people who die in women in that same age group was only about
2% in that case. Very few women smoke. Now,
the challenge we have is that that's the Chinese data,
but there are a series of risk factors that we worry about that if they overlay
on this are gonna cause bad outcomes.
And we happen to be right at ground zero for one of the major ones here in this
country. And that's obesity, mm-hmm, <affirmative>, uh,
we know that obesity is just like smoking in terms of its ability to really
cause severe life threatening disease and 45% of our population today over the
age of 45 in this country are obese or severely obese and there's men and women.
So one of the concerns we have is we're gonna see more of these, uh,
what I guess I would call very serious and life threatening cases occur in our
country because of a different set of risk factors than we saw in China.
Now, you,
you mentioned that there's some sort of incubation period before people become
sick. There's still contagious. What is this incubation period?
And how do we know about it?
When we call something an incubation period we're talking about from the time
you and I got exposed,
meaning I was in a room breathing the air that somebody else who was infected,
uh, with the virus was expelling out.
I breathed it in how long from that time period,
til the time period that you get sick. And what is that?
That's what we call incubation period.
So that's when case numbers can double or triple in every so many days in this
case, it's about four days. So,
and we actually have data there from people who are exposed one time or one time
only. And we know when they were exposed,
where they were exposed and how soon do they get sick afterwards?
So the chaufffer in the car where an individual was sick or showing symptoms.
Then the chauffer gets it four days later. You know,
they were there one time and one time only.
And if the chaufffer does not show any symptoms, he still contagious. He can.
Still, still, he, he could also be contagious too, or he,
and that's one of the things that's challenging here is I might get exposed to
somebody who is totally asymptomatic, no symptoms that virus would appear. Well,
that's not a very strong virus, but in fact, when it infects us,
it could kill us. So we've seen cases of,
of fatal disease that were exposed to people that had minor symptoms themselves.
Wow. And this is what's unfolding here. And,
and this is where I think is such an important, I said,
why the timing is so important, cuz you know, Joel,
we really gotta get information out to the public.
There is so much misinfo information right now and you know,
we're gonna be in this for a while. This is not gonna happen overnight.
And I worry, I keep telling people, we're handling this.
Like it's a Corona blizzard, you know, two or three days mm-hmm, <affirmative>,
we're back to normal. This is a coronavirus winter,
and we're gonna have the next three months or more six months or more that are
gonna be like this. And you know, so far this thing has been unfolding exactly.
As we predicted it, we in our center put out a piece, uh,
on January 20th and said,
this is gonna spread worldwide at the time people said, ah, no, it's just China.
We put out a piece the first week of February and said,
this is gonna pop probably the last week of February.
First week of March is what happens is it has what's called an R not or a
doubling time of, of, of these every four days.
So two increases doubling every four days.
So if you go from two to four to eight to 16, it takes a while to build up.
But when you start going from 500 to a thousand to 2000 to 4,000,
that's what we're seeing happen in places like Italy.
We're beginning to see it in some ways up Seattle. It's what happened in China.
And uh, you know, when people are confronted with that,
suddenly this low risk phenomena that everybody talks about,
isn't so low anymore. And that's what you need to prepare people.
For now, what can be done? Like what,
what can the average person do I see people walking around with masks on wearing
gloves? Is that nonsense largely.
Yes. Yeah. First of all, um, let's step back.
The primary mechanism for transmission is just the respiratory route.
It's just breathing, um, in studies in Germany,
which just have been published literally in the last 24 hours. Um,
they actually followed a group of people who had been exposed to somebody in an
automobile manufacturing plant.
And then they had nine people that with this exposure, he said,
if you have any symptoms at all, contact us,
we wanna follow up with and they all agreed. Well, they got infected.
And so in the very first hours just feeling bad, sore throat,
they went in and sampled their throats, their, their saliva,
their nose for virus, they did blood, they did stool, they did urine.
And they found that at that very moment, when they first got sick,
they hadn't incredibly high levels of virus. Sometimes 10,000 times out,
we saw with SARS in their throats,
meaning they were infectious at that point already.
And they hadn't even had symptoms yet of really any nature they weren't coughing
yet. Wow. And,
and that's where we're concerned because that's the kind of transmission it's,
you know, I always have said trying to stop influenza virus, transmission,
like trying to stop the wind. You know,
we we've never had anything successfully do that other than vaccine.
And we don't have a vaccine here.
So what's happening is that people in public spaces are getting infected and the
way you need to address that is unfortunately if you're older, over 55,
you have some underlying health problems, which unfortunately,
a lot of Americans do. We have, uh,
obesity then right now you don't want to be in large public spaces.
You trying to potentially get infected.
So you can take care of that part as far as what can public health do.
We're not gonna, we can talk about this.
We're not gonna have a vaccine anytime soon. That's happy talk. Um, well we,
you know, we can close school. One of the big challenges we have right now,
if we close schools, what do we accomplish in influenza virus when you,
we close schools during outbreaks,
because it turns out kids are get infected in school.
And they're like little virus reactors, you know,
they come home and they transmit it to mom and dad and brothers and sisters.
And uh, so we close school.
Sometimes Christmas breaks are always rate for kind of putting the dampening
effect on flu. In this case,
kids are not getting sick very often at all,
which is one of the really good news features of this disease in two China,
only 2.1% of the cases are under eight, 19 years of age. And why is that?
You know, we don't completely know. Uh, and,
and I'm gonna come to that in a second because they're getting infected.
It turns one study showed that they still get infected with the virus,
but they don't get sick. And we have that happen.
There's a disease called infectious hepatitis, hepatitis a,
where we have outbreaks in daycares.
And the way we know we have an outbreak is cause it's transmitted through the
stool.
Fecal oral is mom and dad and the daycare providers all get sick and the kids
dose symptoms, we go in and test kids positive.
So some diseases will manifest my primary when you're an adult,
but not as a child. This one appears to be the same.
So do we close schools or not? If we're not really spreading the disease,
because it turns out that if we close schools,
we in a recent study done showed that 38% of nurses today in this country who
are working in the medical care, have kids in school.
And if suddenly we're closing schools for two or three months,
who's gonna take care of those kids.
One fourth of the American population has no sick leave. If we close schools,
they don't get paid if they have to stay home. So when you ask, what can we do?
We have to really be thoughtful about what we do.
Are we doing more harmed and good by closing schools? For example,
even though everybody will say, oh, we gotta do everything we can.
Or do we just tell people, you know,
it's gonna be limiting your contact as much as you can.
And that's really about what we can do.
And limiting the contact. Is that really gonna help?
It does because it's like putting rods in a reaction. If you,
if you don't have as much close contact, you can, you know,
not transmit as much if I'm, if I'm sitting in a room with a hundred people,
people, and we're kind of sharing air,
the transmission's remarkable right here off the coast of California.
You've got your cruise ship.
Cruise ships are notorious for recirculating air inside the inner cabins.
We've had a number of outbreaks. That's why they're.
Having these outbreaks.
On cruise ships. Yeah. And then you leave 'em on.
There. I think the, the cruelest human experiment we've done in a long time.
Yeah. With humans is leave 'em on these ships, get 'em off right away.
Should they get 'em off right away? Oh, absolutely. And what get,
'em what they do with them. Well,
they can put 'em in quarantines of some kind if they want and follow up on 'em,
but you're guaranteed. They're all gonna keep getting infected day after day.
It seems like we're not really prepared for something like this. Although the,
the CDC's been in telling us for a long time that.
We should be, you know, we are, uh, not prepared at all in the sense, you know,
I, uh, wrote the book, um, deadliest enemies that was published in 2017.
Thank you and gentlemen, <laugh> thank you. Go get it. Need it. And panic.
In a chapter 13,
the title of the chapter was SARS and MES a Harer of the things to come.
You know, we've predicted this. And then I wrote a chapter on there.
What a flu pandemic would look like if it emerged in China. And if you read it,
it's exactly what's happened. The supply chains went down,
China locked down the country, it spread to other countries,
people all pointed fingers. And you know, it's,
it's the kind of thing where we hear it and hear it, but don't get prepared.
You know, five years ago I gave a talk at the Mayo clinic. Uh,
first time I talked about this,
I talked many times afterwards and I showed a slide of Puerto Rico picture of
Puerto Rico.
And then I showed the map and then I showed a picture of a building in Puerto
Rico, non-descript building. And I said, this is our next big disaster.
Turns out that 85% of all the world's production of IV bags was
sailing that we need desperately were made in these plants in Puerto Rico.
And all we needed was one, one category,
five hurricane to come through and take it out.
Maria came through a year and a half ago and the world went into a major crisis
with shortage of Ivy bags. Now that was so obvious that was gonna happen.
And yet we don't prepare. That's so foolish. I know, I agree. And that's what,
hopefully this is a wake up call the business as community.
I hopefully will wake up. You know,
one of the other things we're doing right now, uh, Joe,
this is really one of the things that has me most concerned about this whole
situation is our group has been studying for the last year and a half, uh,
with support from the Walton family foundation. Um,
looking at critical drug shortages.
It turns out that we identified 153 drugs in this country that people need
right now or they die. I mean, it's on the crash card.
It's acute critical drugs, a hundred percent more generic.
All of them basically are made offoffshore of the United States and large part
'em were made in China and India. And at this point we have shortages anyway,
every day, just before this crisis happened.
Now these supply chains have gone on down.
Our group is actively helping the United States government try to figure out,
you know, where they're gonna get these drugs. Now, just think of this.
If I came to you and said,
the defense department was gonna outsource all its munitions production to
China, you'd look at me and say, come on. You know what?
The us defense department has no more access to these drugs than anybody else
they are beholden to for these drugs.
690,000 Americans have in-stage renal disease right now,
most of their primary drugs are coming from China.
And now with the shutdown and what's happening with this,
and this is what I talked about in the book,
why I was so concerned because we are at risk. So even this situation is unfold.
It's not just about what the virus does to you.
It's about what the entire system is rigged up to be and what this virus
does. Once it gets into it, Jesus, you're making me nervous.
Well, but that's, before we get done here,
we're gonna talk about what we can do to get people not nervous because this is
why it's too late. <laugh> no, no, no. What I mean is we're gonna,
we're gonna bring you around to take, you know, it's,
my job is not to scare outta your wits. It's scare you into your wits.